add a tutorial in the documentation (#1074)
tweag/nickel: doc/manual/tuto.md

---
slug: tutorial
---

# Managing users

In this tutorial, you will learn how use Nickel to manage a list of users,
and then export it as a YAML file for a program consuming it.

## Step 1: Install nickel

## Step 2: Think about the schema

Our current YAML has different fields, such as `name`, `ssh-keys`,

> `is-admin` or `extra-groups`. To create a Nickel contract that produce
> what we want, and validates input, we need to think about the type of
> each field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`is-admin` or `extra-groups`. To create a Nickel contract that correctly
specifies the shape of this data, we first need to think about the
types of each field
```

I'm not sure it's entirely correct to say the contract "produces" the data we want - it really just does the specification & validation.

> Nickel provides a lot of types, but also structures. In our case,

Reviewer: > Nickel provides a lot of types, but also structures.

I'm not entirely sure what you mean by "structures" here. I think this sentence could possibly be cut.

Reviewer: Yeah, I see what you mean. I think that since the "structure" terminology isn't one that's widely used or well-defined it could potentially create additional confusion, but ultimately it's up to you how you want to phrase this. :smile:

we want `ssh-keys` to allow multiple keys, so this will be an array,
`name` is a sequence of characters, so a type `Str` (for String),
the field `is-admin` can be either true or false, so this is a
`Bool`, finally, `extra-groups` is a list of group names,
which translates as an array of string.

> We can also define some fields optionals, so you don't have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also mark fields as optional, so you don't have
```

to fill them if they don't have any value, `extra-groups` and `ssh-keys`
can be empty in our case, we will make them optional by applying `|

> optional`. The field `is-admin` must be provided to our program consuming
> the YAML, but we don't want to fill it when it's false, we can apply
> a default value of `false`, so we will only define it in our file when
> the user is actually an admin, this makes the file maintenance easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
optional`. 

The field `is-admin` must be present in the YAML we output, but
for most users it will be set to `false`. We can give the field
a default value of `false`, which means it only needs to be 
present in Nickel code when the user is actually an admin.
```

## Step 3: Write a contract

> 

Reviewer: We should possibly mention here that we want to create a `users-schema.ncl` & add this code there, otherwise there's a chance the reader puts this in a different file & gets confused at the next step.

```nickel
{
  UserSchema =
  {
    name | Str,
    ssh-keys | Array Str | optional,
    is-admin | Bool | default = false,
    extra-groups | Array Str | optional,
  },
}
```

## Step 4: Write users

```nickel
let {UserSchema, ..} = import "users-schema.ncl" in
{
  users | Array UserSchema =
  [
    {
      name = "Alice",
      is-admin = true,
      extra-groups = [ "support"],
      ssh-keys = [
        "AAAAAe4QAAAAAB5OLAo1...... alice@nixos",
        "AAAAA26vx+AqGIPZd/NT...... alice@android",
      ],
    },

    {
      name = "Bob",
      extra-groups = [ "pentester"],
    },

    {
      name = "Mallory"
    },

    {
      name = "Grace",
      is-admin = true,
      extra-groups = [ "administrative" ],
    },
 ]
}
```

> 

Reviewer: It could make sense to add a step here where we deliberately enter some incorrect data in order to see the resulting error. (Though, on the other hand, that might also be best left to a different tutorial).

---
slug: tutorial
---

# Managing users

> In this tutorial, you will learn how use Nickel to manage a list of users,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to use Nickel to manage a list of users,
```

and then export it as a YAML file for a program consuming it.

## Step 1: Install nickel

The first step is to obtain nickel on your system. There are different
methods to install Nickel, they are all covered on the [Getting
started](https://nickel-lang.org/getting-started/#getting-started)
page of Nickel project website.

> ## Step 2: Think about the schema

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's worth adding a paragraph explaining that writing a contract is optional. That is, you could just write out the users configuration as a list of records and export that. The reason to spend the time thinking about a contract is to catch mistakes like in step 6

Author: Good

> The YAML we want to produce as different fiels with different types
> (lists, booleans, strings), here is a sample of what we need:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The YAML we want to produce has different fields with different types
(lists, booleans, strings). Here is a sample of what we need:
```

```yaml
users:
  - name: Aisha
    is-admin: true
    ssh-keys:
      - AAAAApqCA8oKAB5S/47f...... aisha@work
  - name: Violet
    extra-groups:
      - accounting
```

We can spot attributes such as `name`, `ssh-keys`, `is-admin` or
`extra-groups`. To create a Nickel contract that correctly specifies
the shape of this data, we need to think about the type needed for
each attribute.

> For example, the attribute `name` is a string, which translates as `Str`
> in Nickel. Meanwhile, `ssh-keys` must allow multiple keys, so this is
> an list of strings, written as `Array Str` in Nickel. `is-admin` is a
> boolean, written as `Bool`. Finally, `extra-groups` is a list of group
> names, which is the same type used for `ssh-keys`, we need `Array Str`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the attribute `name` is a string, which translates to `Str`
in Nickel. Meanwhile, `ssh-keys` must allow multiple keys, so this is
a list of strings, written as `Array Str` in Nickel. The field `is-admin` is a
boolean, written as `Bool`. Finally, `extra-groups` is a list of group
names, so we need `Array Str`, the same type used for `ssh-keys`.
```

> We can also mark fields as optional so you won't have to explicitly write
> about them if they don't have any value, `extra-groups` and `ssh-keys`
> can be empty in the example, we will make them optional by using the
> `optional` keyword.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also mark fields as `optional` so you won't have to explicitly write
them if they don't have any value. In the example,`extra-groups` and `ssh-keys`
can be empty, so we will mark them as optional using the
`optional` keyword.
```

The field `is-admin` must always be present in the YAML file, but
for most of our users it will be set to `false`. Fortunately, we can
assign the default value `false` to this field , which means you only

> need write `is-admin = true` in Nickel code when the user is actually
> an administrator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need to write `is-admin = true` in Nickel code when the user is actually
an administrator.
```

## Step 3: Write a contract

> Create a text file named `users-schema.ncl`, we will
> write our contract defining attributes and associated constraints such
> as a type, marking the attribute optional, and a default value if any.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a text file named `users-schema.ncl`. We will
write our contract defining attributes and associated constraints such
as a type, marking the attribute optional, and a default value if there is one.
```

```nickel
{
  UserSchema =
  {
    name | Str,
    ssh-keys | Array Str | optional,
    is-admin | Bool | default = false,
    extra-groups | Array Str | optional,
  },
}
```

## Step 4: Write users

Now, create a text file named `users.ncl` that will import our contract
file created previously. This file will contain the actual data we need
to use.

```nickel
let {UserSchema, ..} = import "users-schema.ncl" in
{
  users | Array UserSchema =
  [
    {
      name = "Alice",
      is-admin = true,
      extra-groups = [ "support"],
      ssh-keys = [
        "AAAAAe4QAAAAAB5OLAo1...... alice@nixos",
        "AAAAA26vx+AqGIPZd/NT...... alice@android",
      ],
    },

    {
      name = "Bob",
      extra-groups = [ "pentester"],
    },

    {
      name = "Mallory"
    },

    {
      name = "Grace",
      is-admin = true,
      extra-groups = [ "administrative" ],
    },
 ]
}
```

## Step 5: Export as YAML

> By default, nickel exports as JSON type, so we need to use the extra
> parameter `--format yaml` to export as YAML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, nickel exports data as JSON. But we can change that using the extra
parameter `--format yaml` to export as YAML.
```

```shell
nickel -f users.ncl export --export yaml
```

gives this result:

```yaml
---
users:
  - extra-groups:
      - support
    is-admin: true
    name: Alice
    ssh-keys:
      - AAAAAe4QAAAAAB5OLAo1...... alice@nixos
      - AAAAA26vx+AqGIPZd/NT...... alice@android
  - extra-groups:
      - pentester
    name: Bob
  - name: Mallory
  - extra-groups:
      - administrative
    is-admin: true
    name: Grace
```

## Step 6: Try to make a mistake

In this extra step, we will make a mistake on purpose in the file
`users.ncl` and try to export the data as YAML. We will see what happens

> when Nickel detects that a contract use is incorrect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this extra step, we will make a mistake on purpose in the file
`users.ncl` and try to export the data as YAML. We will see what happens
when Nickel detects that a value doesn't satisfy a contract.

---
slug: tutorial
---

# Managing users

In this tutorial, you will learn how to use Nickel to manage a list of

> users, and then export it as a YAML file for a program consuming it.

Reviewer 3: The "for a program consuming it" sounds a little strange to the ear, although I don't think it's incorrect per se. Maybe "for another program to consume"? Or just get rid of the end of the sentence?

```suggestion
users, and then export it as a YAML file.
```

Author: I wanted to give some kind of background about the "why we need to generate a YAML file", but I suppose we can drop the end of the sentence

## Step 1: Install nickel

> The first step is to obtain nickel on your system. There are different
> methods to install Nickel, they are all covered on the [Getting
> started](https://nickel-lang.org/getting-started/#getting-started)
> page of Nickel project website.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first step is to make Nickel available on your system. Please refer to the different installation methods documented in [Getting
started](https://nickel-lang.org/getting-started/#getting-started).
```

## Step 2: Think about the schema

The YAML we want to produce has different fields with different types
(lists, booleans, strings). Here is a sample of what we need:

```yaml
users:
  - name: Aisha
    is-admin: true
    ssh-keys:
      - AAAAApqCA8oKAB5S/47f...... aisha@work
  - name: Violet
    extra-groups:
      - accounting
```

> We can spot attributes such as `name`, `ssh-keys`, `is-admin` or

Reviewer 3: Just to be consistent with the documentation and the naming in Nickel in general (attributes is Nix terminology). I think we even use `attribute` sometimes for metadata like `optional` or `default`.

```suggestion
We can spot fields such as `name`, `ssh-keys`, `is-admin` or
```

`extra-groups`. To create a Nickel contract that correctly specifies
the shape of this data, we need to think about the type needed for
each attribute.

> For example, the attribute `name` is a string, which translates to `Str`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the field `name` is a string, which translates to `Str`
```

in Nickel. Meanwhile, `ssh-keys` must allow multiple keys, so this is a
list of strings, written as `Array Str` in Nickel. The field `is-admin`
is a boolean, written as `Bool`. Finally, `extra-groups` is a list of
group names, so we need `Array Str`, the same type used for `ssh-keys`.

We can also mark fields as `optional` so you won't have to explicitly
write them if they don't have any value. In the example,`extra-groups`
and `ssh-keys` can be empty, so we will mark them as optional using the
`optional` keyword.

The field `is-admin` must always be present in the YAML file, but for
most of our users it will be set to `false`. Fortunately, we can assign
the default value `false` to this field , which means you only need

> to write `is-admin = true` in Nickel code when the user is actually

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to write `is-admin = true` when the user is actually
```

an administrator.

## Step 3: Write a contract

Create a text file named `users-schema.ncl`. We will write our contract

> defining attributes and associated constraints such as a type, marking

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
defining fields and associated constraints such as a type, marking
```

the attribute optional, and a default value if there is one.

Please note that using a contract isn't mandatory per-se to use Nickel,

> but it will allow you to validate your input data (See Step 6 for an

Reviewer 3: We can make a link to `Step 6`. I don't remember the exact syntax, but it's probably something like `[Step 6](#step- 6-try-to-make-a-mistake]`. You might find examples of such anchors in other pages of the manual.

Author: done

example).

> Please note that using a contract isn't mandatory per-se to use Nickel,
> but it will allow you to validate your input data (See Step 6 for an
> example).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Duplication

```nickel
{
  UserSchema =
  {
    name | Str,

>     ssh-keys | Array Str | optional,

Reviewer 3: We don't have clear formatting rules yet (but soonish maybe, with topiary :slightly_smiling_face:  ) but I think we should abide by the rule of making a multiline block if there is more than one metadata; otherwise, I find it hard to read a bit overwhelming.

```suggestion
    ssh-keys
        | Array Str
        | optional,
```

Author: okay!

>     is-admin | Bool | default = false,
>     extra-groups | Array Str | optional,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    is-admin
      | Bool
      | default = false,
    extra-groups
      | Array Str
      | optional,
```
